So let's start talking about
browser data storage then.
So we have already seen everything
that we're going to cover.
So now we're going to
start with the first part,
with the first unit that we have there,
the state of the browser storage.
But first, why browser data storage?
So why is this important to
ask to web developers, okay?
First, to increase user experience, okay?
So, yeah, originally the web
was actually server side, okay,
then we moved to client side.
And now we are kind of going back to the
roots with a server side rendering again.
But in the middle, even if we are doing
just plain server side rendering,
we need to increase user experience
thanks to browser data storage.
We will see a couple of use cases for
that, okay, but that's the first thing.
The second one is performance, okay?
We know, or we should know,
that web performance is actually
really important for conversion, okay?
So if you are following different
guidelines of web performance,
if you are applying techniques for
web performance that will
improve your web vitals,
the metrics that are actually measuring
performance in our websites,
that will lead to better conversion.
And we are doing websites
because we want conversion,
whatever conversion means for
your app, for your website.
More users register, more sales,
more users typing things in your app,
whatever conversion means, we can increase
performance, thanks to using these APIs.
Offline support,
this may not be suitable for
all the websites, for all the apps, okay?
But anyway, sometimes offering
some kind of a basic offline
experience within your website or
your web app is a good idea.
Even if that offline experience is
just your logo and a message saying,
I'm sorry that we have a connection
issue so I cannot provide you something.
Or even if you can provide
an alternative game.
For example, there are some newspapers
out there, some media websites,
that when you're offline,
you get a crossword.
So okay, you don't get the news, but
you get something from that web app.
Well, thanks to these APIs,
because they are browser-based,
they are not based on the server.
If the user has no connection or
the connection doesn't work or
your server is down,
that's another option,
then client side you can provide an
alternative experience, okay, make sense?
So we can store user generated content.
For example, it can be social networks,
I mean, when we are typing a post.
So while you're typing the posts,
you can do everything client side.
Of course, you will sync that data later.
But also it can be just an app,
a corporate application for
employees that are on
the street collecting data.
Well, you're gonna start collecting
that data client-side and
then that data will be synced to
the server at one point in the future.
So all that data that is generated by
the user needs a place to be stored,
and that's why we're going to use APIs for
that.
To store the app's state.
So if you're using frameworks or
libraries such as Redux,
for example, or
the Flux design pattern, anyway.
Sometimes you have this idea of
the app state that is kind of one or
more objects that represents
the current state of your app.
Well, you can actually save that state and
restore that state later.
Because sometimes the life cycle
of our app is not what we think.
So maybe the user is getting out of
our web app for a couple of minutes.
But the user is then recording
a video with a phone.
And when the user go back to your web app,
your web app is restarting.
Because it was killed from memory,
it was discarded from memory.
So, well, in that case, you could
save the app's state somewhere and
restore that state when
the user goes back, so
the user experience will look like if
the app was never discarded, okay?
So cached assets.
So to improve performance and also to
do some kind of complex algorithms, you
can cache assets client side and then you
can play with those assets client side.
I mean, there are many things that you
can do there, but I've seen a lot of,
let's say complex ideas, for
example, downloading 1,000 images.
But instead of making 1,000 HTTP requests,
you're making one, downloading a zip file.
And then using JavaScript or even web
assembly, you can unzip that client side
and store the assets individually in one
of the storages that we will see later.
Again, these are just ideas
that I'm throwing you,
so they may trigger some bells in your
brain to see if you find a use case,
okay, for
everything that we're going to see today.
Authentication tokens,
this is probably something that is really
useful in case you have
authentication in your website.
So if you are using OAuth,
typically you have a token,
you need a place to store that token.
Cookies today,
we will mention cookies in a minute.
But it's not a good place to
store data for many reasons.
But that cookies are getting really,
really complex because
they are the problem,
they are the cause for user tracking.
And so browsers are making cookies
more complicated every day,
despite the API is terrible for
storing data.
So we want another way to store data.
Analytics, so instead of sending
HTTP request or beacons to a server,
every time you have analytics, you can
just store the analytics client side.
And every once in a while,
you sync that data to the server, okay?
So different use cases for the data.
So how does it work?
Well, using JavaScript,
we're going to store and
retrieve data that is going to be stored
locally in a user's device, okay?
It feels simple but you will see in
a second that it's not so simple, okay?
So browsers manage implementation and
security details.
So we don't manage that, okay?
So we don't know where the data is
going to store in the user file system.
We don't manage that.
We don't manage which
format the data is actually
going to be stored physically in the OS.
Yeah, we have an API, we have
an interface, we use the interface.
But we don't know what happens
behind the scenes, okay?
And that's okay, we shouldn't know.
So every browser stores
that data differently.
And we should always treat the data as
something that may disappear anytime.
So we will talk about all
the situations that may trigger that.
But from my phone drops in
the toilet to wherever,
okay, I'm resetting
the phone from factory,
so there are many situations where
the data might not be there.
So we should always treat it as something
that may disappear at any time, okay?
The whole idea is that data will
persist between browser sessions.
So if I store something there, that data
may be there in a year as well, okay?
If nothing happens,
the data will be there later, tomorrow,
this afternoon, in a month,
in a week, or in a year, okay?
So on most APIs that we are going to see,
probably 95% of the APIs
that we will cover, there will be no
permission from the user required.
So the user will never see a dialog or
something saying, hey,
this website is storing data client side.
So this is completely
transparent to the user, okay?
So it's good in one way, but
also that will mean that there
are some challenges, okay?
Because the browsers probably won't
want us to overuse that, okay?
Because we know the space is limited,
at least disk space, okay?
But have in mind that, so
there are a couple of exceptions
that we will see later.
But we won't require an explicit
permission from the user to
store data client-side.
And everything that we're going to see
today works for websites, web apps,
progressive web app,
installed progressive web apps.
Installed progressive web apps from
the app stores, and also hybrid apps.
Hybrid apps are when you
have a native shell and
then you have a web app on
top of the native shell.
For example, Apache Cordova,
also known as PhoneGap, or
Capacitor from Ionic, or
Electron on the desktop are frameworks,
libraries that will help
you creating hybrids.
So some of these API's may have
a different implementation when you're
using those frameworks.
And those hybrid framework may offer you
alternative APIs as well for data storage.
But typically, everything that we're
going to see works there as well, okay?
And data, by default,
is not shared to the server, okay?
The only exception to that is cookies.
Yeah, it's an API or it's a kind of
a storage that is client-side, but
it's the only one that is
automatically shared with the server.
So a cookie is automatically shared with
your server on every HTTP request, okay?
In the HTTP request headers, all your
cookies will be sent to the server, okay?
And also,
data is not shared with other web apps,
okay, at least with a web
app in a different origin.
We will talk about that in a second.